---
title: "ManyClasses"
---


Research on learning has unique strengths when conducted in authentic educational contexts, as compared with laboratory contexts.  Principal among these, an experiment embedded in a real class will provide a more legitimate measure of a learning activity’s benefit for real educational outcomes than an experiment with a synthetic learning task and materials (Motz et al., in press).  But this strength also presents a problem: the properties of the class context constrain the generalizability of the research conclusions.  For example, there might be differences in the effectiveness of a learning activity for different disciplines (e.g., Psychology vs. Chemistry), class formats (e.g., MOOC vs. face-to-face), and student populations (e.g., urban community colleges vs. elite universities), among others (see Koedinger, Booth, & Klahr, 2013; Gašević et al., 2016).  How can one abstract a generalizable research inference from the situated context of a classroom experiment?

We propose a research model for disentangling abstract learning principles from authentic learning contexts, and we call this model ManyClasses.  As with similar efforts in psychology (ManyLabs, Klein et al., 2014; ManyBabies, Frank et al., 2017), the core feature of ManyClasses is that researchers would measure an experimental effect across many independent samples – in this case, across many classes.  Rather than conducting an embedded learning study in just one educational context (e.g., Introductory Physics course at a small private college), a ManyClasses study could examine the same research question in dozens of contexts, spanning a range of courses, institutions, formats, and student populations.  By drawing the same experimental contrast across a diversity of educational implementations, and then analyzing pooled results, researchers can assess the degree to which an experimental effect might yield benefits, untethered from specific contexts.  In addition to contributing to an estimation of the generalizable effect size of manipulations beyond particular classroom implementations, ManyClasses could also systematically investigate how a manipulation might be more- or less-effective for different students, in different situations.

